---
title: "EARS 59/159: Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate/Graduate Course"
permalink: /teaching/ears-59_159
venue: "Dartmouth College, Department of Earth Sciences"
date: 2024-03-25
location: "Hanover, NH"
---
Taught: Winter 2020, Spring 2022, Spring 2024

### Course overview:
This course will focus on the classification and interpretation of Igneous (both volcanic and plutonic) and Metamorphic rocks in the context of plate tectonics. Throughout the term we will discuss on rock fabric, texture, mineralogy, and chemistry in the context of the tectonic processes that operate on Earth today and throughout geologic history. Much of the latter half of course will focus around a final research project to investigate a set of samples collected on a course field trip, and/or related to current research in the Earth Sciences department. This project will be carried out over the course of the term both in class and during labs, and is designed to give students insight into the collection and interpretation of novel data in field and petrographic context.

### Prerequisites:
EARS 40 and/or EARS 1

### Textbooks:
Principles of Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology (2nd Edition) by John. D. Winter. This will be our primary text. A copy is available on course reserve in the library.

Additional resources:
Essentials of Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology by Frost and Frost 
Principles of Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology by Philpotts and Ague
A Color Atlas of Rocks and Minerals in Thin Section by MacKenzie and Adams
Atlas of the Rock-Forming Minerals in Thin Section by Mackenzie and Guilford