---
title: "Chronostratigraphic model of a high-resolution drill core record of the past million years from the Koora Basin, south Kenya Rift: Overcoming the difficulties of variable sedimentation rate and hiatuses"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-05-29-Deino-etal-2019a
excerpt: '------'
date: 2019-05-29
venue: 'Quaternary Science Reviews'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2019.05.009'
authors: 'Alan Deino, Rene Dommain, C. Brenhin Keller, Richard Potts, Anna Behrensmeyer, Emily Beverly, John King, Clifford Heil, Mona Stockhecke, Erik Brown, Jessica Moerman, Peter de Menocal, and the Olorgesailie Drilling Project Scientific Team'
citation: 'Deino, A.L., Dommain, R., Keller, C.B., Potts, R., Behrensmeyer, A.K., Beverly, E.J., King, J., Heil, C.W., Stockhecke, M., Brown, E.T., Moerman, J., de Menocal, P., Levin, N.E., &amp; ODP Scientific Team. (2019). Chronostratigraphic model of a high-resolution drill core record of the past million years from the Koora Basin, south Kenya Rift: Overcoming the difficulties of variable sedimentation rate and hiatuses. <i>Quaternary Science Reviews</i> 215, 213–231.'
---

------

>Abstract: <br/>The Olorgesailie Drilling Project and the related Hominin Sites and Paleolakes Drilling Project in East Africa were initiated to test hypotheses and models linking environmental change to hominin evolution by drilling lake basin sediments adjacent to important archeological and paleoanthropological sites. Drill core OLO12-1A recovered 139 m of sedimentary and volcaniclastic strata from the Koora paleolake basin, southern Kenya Rift, providing the opportunity to compare paleoenvironmental influences over the past million years with the parallel record exposed at the nearby Olorgesailie archeological site. To refine our ability to link core-to-outcrop paleoenvironmental records, we institute here a methodological framework for deriving a robust age model for the complex lithostratigraphy of OLO12-1A. Firstly, chronostratigraphic control points for the core were established based on 40Ar/39Ar ages from intercalated tephra deposits and a basal trachyte flow, as well as the stratigraphic position of the Brunhes-Matuyama geomagnetic reversal. This dataset was combined with the position and duration of paleosols, and analyzed using a new Bayesian algorithm for high-resolution age-depth modelling of hiatus-bearing stratigraphic sections. This model addresses three important aspects relevant to highly dynamic, non-linear depositional environments: 1) correcting for variable rates of deposition, 2) accommodating hiatuses, and 3) quantifying realistic age uncertainty with centimetric resolution. Our method is applicable to typical depositional systems in extensional rifts as well as to drill cores from other dynamic terrestrial or aquatic environments. We use the core age model and lithostratigraphy to examine the interconnectivity of the Koora Basin to adjacent areas and sources of volcanism.

Suggested citation: <br/>Deino, A.L., Dommain, R., Keller, C.B., Potts, R., Behrensmeyer, A.K., Beverly, E.J., King, J., Heil, C.W., Stockhecke, M., Brown, E.T., Moerman, J., de Menocal, P., Levin, N.E., & ODP Scientific Team. (2019). Chronostratigraphic model of a high-resolution drill core record of the past million years from the Koora Basin, south Kenya Rift: Overcoming the difficulties of variable sedimentation rate and hiatuses. <i>Quaternary Science Reviews</i> 215, 213–231.