---
title: "Volcano-pluton connections at the Lake City magmatic center (Colorado, USA)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-08-11-Pamukcu-etal-2022
excerpt: '------'
date: 2022-08-11
venue: 'Geosphere'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1130/GES02467.1'
codeurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1130/GEOS.S.19783009'
authors: 'Ayla S Pamukçu, Blair Schoene, Chad D Deering, C Brenhin Keller, and Michael P Eddy'
citation: 'Pamukçu, A.S., Schoene, B., Deering, C.D., Keller, C.B. and Eddy, M.P., (2022). Volcano-pluton connections at the Lake City magmatic center (Colorado, USA). <i>Geosphere</i>  10.1130/GES02467.1'
---
<a href='https://doi.org/10.1130/GEOS.S.19783009'>Code and Data</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

------

>Abstract: <br/>Exposed at the Lake City caldera (Colorado, USA) is the ca. 23 Ma reversely stratified (rhyolite to trachyte) Sunshine Peak Tuff and post-collapse syenite and monzonite resurgent intrusions. Existing models for this system suggest that the rhyolites are related to the trachyte and resurgent syenite through fractional crystallization, separation, and remobilization (crystal mush model), and that multiple magma batches were involved in the system (Hon, 1987; Kennedy et al., 2016; Lubbers et al., 2020). We use U-Pb zircon CA-ID-TIMS-TEA and zircon trace-element modeling to further probe age and geochemical relationships between the extrusive and intrusive units. Zircon ages and compositions from the erupted units and the syenite overlap, suggesting these magmas were related and may have mixed prior to eruption. Results from the monzonite suggest it was a contemporaneous but distinct magma batch that mixed with parts of the larger system. Trends in zircon geochemistry are decoupled from time, reflecting a complex history of accessory mineral saturation and mixing of magma batches, and a distinct high-Hf population of zircon grains hints at the existence of an additional, independent batch of rhyolitic magma in the system. The new ages we present shorten the lifetime of the Lake City magmatic system from 80 to 300 k.y. (Bove et al., 2001) to 60 to 220 k.y. and suggest the high-silica rhyolite magma crystallized over a minimum of ~160 k.y. This latter timescale likely reflects a protracted history that includes differentiation of a parent melt prior to extraction of eruptible high-silica rhyolite magma.

Suggested citation: <br/>Pamukçu, A.S., Schoene, B., Deering, C.D., Keller, C.B. and Eddy, M.P., (2022). Volcano-pluton connections at the Lake City magmatic center (Colorado, USA). <i>Geosphere</i>  10.1130/GES02467.1