---
title: "Regional trends and petrologic factors inhibit global interpretations of zircon trace element compositions"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-05-09-Roberts-etal-2024b
excerpt: '------'
date: 2024-05-09
venue: 'Geoscience Frontiers'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2024.101852'
authors: 'Nick M.W. Roberts, Christopher J. Spencer, Stephen Puetz, C. Brenhin Keller, Simon Tapster'
citation: 'Roberts, N. M., Spencer, C. J., Puetz, S., Keller, C. B., &amp; Tapster, S. (2024). Regional trends and petrologic factors inhibit global interpretations of zircon trace element compositions. <i>Geoscience Frontiers</i>, 101852.'
---

------

>Abstract: <br/>The trace element composition of zircon reveals information about the melt that they are derived from, as such, detrital zircon trace element compositions can be used to interrogate melt compositions, and thus the evolution of the continental crust in time and space. Here, we present a global database of detrital zircon compositions and use it to test whether average global trends for five common petrogenetic proxies truly represent secular changes in continental evolution. We demonstrate that the secular trend is broadly comparable across continental regions for Ti-in-zircon temperatures, but for other trace element ratios interrogated, secular trends are highly variable between continental regions. Because trace element ratios result from multiple petrologic variables, we argue that these petrogenetic proxies can be overinterpreted if projected to global geologic processes. In particular, we caution against the interpretation of crustal thickness from trace elements in zircon, and we argue that our results negate current hypotheses concerning secular changes in crustal thickness.

Suggested citation: <br/>Roberts, N. M., Spencer, C. J., Puetz, S., Keller, C. B., & Tapster, S. (2024). Regional trends and petrologic factors inhibit global interpretations of zircon trace element compositions. <i>Geoscience Frontiers</i>, 101852.