---
title: "Recommendations for the reporting and interpretation of isotope dilution U-Pb geochronological information"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-04-01-Condon-etal-2024
excerpt: '------'
date: 2024-04-01
venue: 'GSA Bulletin'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1130/B37321.1'
authors: 'Dan Condon,  Blair Schoene,  Mark Schmitz,  Urs Schaltegger,  Ryan B. Ickert,  Yuri Amelin, Lars E. Augland,  Kevin R. Chamberlain,  Drew S. Coleman,  James N. Connelly,  Fernando Corfu, James L. Crowley,  Joshua H.F.L. Davies,  Steven W. Denyszyn,  Michael P. Eddy,  Sean P. Gaynor, Larry M. Heaman,  Magdalena H. Huyskens,  Sandra Kamo,  Jennifer Kasbohm,  C. Brenhin Keller, Scott A. MacLennan,  Noah M. McLean,  Stephen Noble,  Maria Ovtcharova,  André Paul, Jahandar Ramezani,  Matt Rioux,  Diana Sahy,  James S. Scoates,  Dawid Szymanowski,  Simon Tapster, Marion Tichomirowa,  Corey J. Wall,  Jörn-Frederik Wotzlaw,  Chuan Yang,  and Qing-Zhu Yin'
citation: 'Condon, D., et al. (2024) Recommendations for the reporting and interpretation of isotope dilution U-Pb geochronological information. <i>GSA Bulletin</i> 10.1130/B37321.1'
---

------

>Abstract: <br/>U-Pb geochronology by isotope dilution−thermal ionization mass spectrometry (ID-TIMS) has the potential to be the most precise and accurate of the deep time chronometers, especially when applied to high-U minerals such as zircon. Continued analytical improvements have made this technique capable of regularly achieving better than 0.1% precision and accuracy of dates from commonly occurring high-U minerals across a wide range of geological ages and settings. To help maximize the long-term utility of published results, we present and discuss some recommendations for reporting ID-TIMS U-Pb geochronological data and associated metadata in accordance with accepted principles of data management. Further, given that the accuracy of reported ages typically depends on the interpretation applied to a set of individual dates, we discuss strategies for data interpretation. We anticipate that this paper will serve as an instructive guide for geologists who are publishing ID-TIMS U-Pb data, for laboratories generating the data, the wider geoscience community who use such data, and also editors of journals who wish to be informed about community standards. Combined, our recommendations should increase the utility, veracity, versatility, and “half-life” of ID-TIMS U-Pb geochronological data.

Suggested citation: <br/>Condon, D., et al. (2024) Recommendations for the reporting and interpretation of isotope dilution U-Pb geochronological information. <i>GSA Bulletin</i> 10.1130/B37321.1